---
title: Earthquakes and Seismic Waves
doc_id: earthquakes
topic: earth science
source: Adaptive-RAG teaching corpus (original text, plain-text format with no section headings)
---

An earthquake is the shaking of the ground produced by the sudden release of energy
stored in rock. Tectonic plates move continuously, but friction locks their boundaries
in place, so stress accumulates in the surrounding rock over years or centuries. When
the stress exceeds the strength of the rock or the friction holding a fault, the fault
slips abruptly and the stored elastic strain is released as seismic waves. This
explanation is known as elastic rebound theory. The point underground where the rupture
begins is the focus or hypocentre, and the point on the surface directly above it is the
epicentre.

Faults are classified by the direction of relative motion. A normal fault forms where
the crust is being pulled apart and one block drops down relative to the other. A
reverse or thrust fault forms under compression, pushing one block up over another, and
the largest earthquakes ever recorded have occurred on the gently inclined thrust faults
of subduction zones. A strike-slip fault accommodates horizontal sliding with little
vertical movement, the San Andreas Fault in California being the standard example.
Earthquake depth is itself informative, since shallow events occur in all settings but
only subduction zones generate the deep earthquakes found hundreds of kilometres below
the surface.

Seismic waves come in two families. Body waves travel through the interior of the
planet. The faster of the two, the primary or P wave, is a compressional wave in which
particles oscillate along the direction of travel, and it can pass through solids and
liquids alike. The secondary or S wave is a shear wave in which particles move
perpendicular to the direction of travel, and because liquids cannot support shear it
cannot pass through the outer core. That fact produces the S wave shadow zone and was
the original evidence that the core of the planet is liquid.

Surface waves travel along the outside of the planet, arrive after the body waves and
decay more slowly with distance. Love waves shear the ground horizontally while Rayleigh
waves roll it in an elliptical motion rather like a water wave. Surface waves have larger
amplitudes and longer periods than body waves, and they cause most of the destruction in
a large shallow earthquake. The interval between the arrival of the P wave and the
arrival of the S wave grows with distance from the source, so a single seismograph can
estimate its distance from an earthquake, and readings from three or more stations can be
combined to locate the epicentre by triangulation.

Two different quantities describe the size of an earthquake and are often confused.
Magnitude measures the energy released at the source and has a single value for a given
event. The moment magnitude scale has replaced the older Richter scale for large
earthquakes because the Richter scale saturates and cannot distinguish between the very
largest events. Both are logarithmic: a rise of one unit corresponds to about a tenfold
increase in wave amplitude and roughly a thirty-two-fold increase in released energy.
Intensity, by contrast, measures the effects of shaking at a particular place, so a
single earthquake produces many intensity values that decline with distance from the
epicentre and are recorded on scales such as the Modified Mercalli scale.

Damage depends on far more than magnitude. Ground conditions matter greatly, because
loose sediment amplifies shaking compared with solid bedrock, and saturated sandy soils
can lose their strength entirely and behave as a fluid in a process called liquefaction.
Building height interacts with the frequency content of the shaking through resonance,
so a given earthquake may damage mid-rise buildings while leaving low structures intact.
Secondary hazards frequently cause more deaths than the shaking itself, including
landslides, fires from ruptured gas mains, and tsunamis generated when a submarine thrust
fault displaces the water column above it.

Earthquakes cannot be predicted in the sense of naming a time, place and magnitude in
advance, and decades of research into precursors have not produced a reliable method.
What is possible is forecasting, which assigns probabilities to a region over a period of
years using the historical record and measured strain accumulation, and early warning,
which exploits the fact that the fast P wave arrives before the destructive surface
waves. Detecting the P wave near the epicentre allows an automated alert to reach more
distant areas seconds to tens of seconds before strong shaking, enough time to stop
trains, close valves and take cover. Beyond that, loss is reduced mainly by engineering
and planning: enforcing seismic building codes, retrofitting older structures with
braces or base isolation, restricting construction on unstable ground, and rehearsing
the emergency response.
